
Abstract:
In 1994, the State of California acquired the 10,000 acres of salt ponds on the west side of the Napa River and created the Napa-Sonoma Marsh State Wildlife Area, which is managed by the California Department of Fish and Game (DFG).  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and State Coastal Conservancy, with DFG and Sonoma County Water Agency (SCWA), conducted a Feasibility Study from 1998 to 2004, which included plans for tidal marsh restoration, managed pond enhancement, and the use of recycled water.Tidal restoration of Ponds 3, 4, and 5 (2,900 acres) is nearing completion, and enhancements to allow better management of Ponds 1/1A, and 2 will be constructed in 2007.  These phases of the project have been funded by the Wildlife Conservation Board and CALFED and implemented by Ducks Unlimited.  The remaining portaion of the project consists of enhancements to Ponds 6/6A, 7/7A, and 8 and construction of a Recycled Water Pipeline to speed bittern reduction.  Pond 7, which contains bittern (a by-product of salt production) is located in the northern portion of the CDFG Napa-Sonoma Marsh Wildlife Area and stores an estimated 2.5 billion gallons of bittern. Removing the bittern through levee breaching or other more common techniques is not feasible because of RWQCB restrictions on discharging bittern into the Bay. However, the RWQCB will consider discharge from these ponds if the compounds in the bittern are diluted to near background levels (1 part bitrtern to 100 parts water). To sufficiently dilute the bittern stored in Pond 7 will require enormous amounts of water. SCWA has proposed working with the Corps to construct the necessary pipelines and pump stations from the Sonoma Valley County Sanitation District (SVCSD) wastewater treatment plant to provide recycled water to the bittern pond for the dilution process. The project would provide approximately 2,600 AF of tertiary-treated recycled water per year. Dilution of the bittern is anticipated to take between 10 and 15 years. Once the need for bittern discharge is over, the recycled water will be used for agricultural irrigation adjacent to the pipeline alignment.The Napa Sanitation District (NSD) is a partner, along with the Sonoma County Water Agency, in the Napa River Salt Marsh Restoration Project, providing up to 5,500 af of tertiary-treated recycled water per year. NSD is planning to construct a recycled water pipeline through South Los Carneros which will eventually connect the Soscol Water Recycling Facility with the Napa River Salt Marsh Restoration project. The NSD pipeline will connect with the Sonoma County Water Agency’s pipeline along Buchli Station Road where the road intersects with the Northwestern Pacific railway line. Recycled water is needed from both agencies to fulfill the project goals of reducing pond salinity and restoring marsh habitat. As an added benefit, the project could provide recycled water to serve different agricultural areas in the Carneros region.  
